taken from: <https://wiki.icaci.org/index.php?title=S-100_IHO_Universal_hydrographic_data_model>

## Implementation guidelines

S-100 was developed to align and exploit ISO/TC 211 standards to support a variety of data formats, products and customers. The data model will allow the development of new applications that leverage the new technologies and reaches beyond the traditional scope of hydrographical applications. S-100 encapsulates the use of best practice methods and procedures by including guidelines on implementing efficient production methods, optimizing the quality of products and services, and enabling interoperability through common interfaces.

S-100 specifies a framework of components that can be used by interested communities to develop their own maritime geographic products and services. S-100 consists of eleven profiles of ISO/TC 211 standards:

 1. **Conceptual Schema Language**\
    The first part of S-100 specifies a CSL and basic types that shall be used within the IHO community. The CSL is defined as a combination of UML and a set of basic data type definitions for specification of geographic information. Guidelines on the use of UML to create standardized geographic information and service models are also provided. Basic knowledge of the [Object Management Group](http://www.omg.org) (OMG) UML is required to understand and implement the CSL profile.
 2. **Management of IHO Geospatial Information Registries**\
    The management of IHO geographic information registries profile specifies the procedures that shall be followed when maintaining and publishing registers of unique, unambiguous and permanent identifiers assigned to items of geographic, hydrographical and metadata information. The roles and responsibilities for management of a registry and its registers are defined and described.\
    This part also specifies a feature concept dictionary registers. A FCD specifies hydrographical definitions that may be used to describe geographic information. Such a register will improve the IHO’s ability to manage and extend multiple products based on S-100.
 3. **General Feature Model and Rules for Application Schema**\
    The General Feature Model defines a conceptual model of features, their characteristics and associations, and the rules for developing an application schema. This part further deals with conceptual modelling of features and their properties, conceptual modelling of information types and associated attributes, and the development of application schemas and the related rules for such a schema.
 4. **Metadata**\
    The S-100 metadata profile described is divided into three parts and provides specifications for describing, validating and exchanging metadata of data produced by hydrographical organisations. This profile is based on ISO 19115:2003, [ISO 19115-2:2009 Geographic information - Metadata - Part 2: Extensions for imagery and gridded data](https://wiki.icaci.org/index.php?title=ISO_19115-2:2009_Geographic_information_-_Metadata_-_Part_2:_Extensions_for_imagery_and_gridded_data), and [ISO/TS 19139:2007 Geographic information - Metadata - XML schema implementation](https://wiki.icaci.org/index.php?title=ISO/TS_19139:2007_Geographic_information_-_Metadata_-_XML_schema_implementation). The primary intent of this profile is to describe digital geographic data. However, it can also be used for other products, such as charts, maps, images, textual documents and non-geographic resources. The profile is not limited to ISO 19115 since it can be extended to include additional resources.
 5. **Feature Catalogue**\
    The feature catalogue specifies a framework for organisation and reporting the classification of real world phenomena as geographic data. It defines the methodology for classification of the feature types and specifies how they are organised in a feature catalogue and presented to the users of a set of geographic data. A feature catalogue shall be defined for each product specification. This profile is for defining geographic features at the type level.
 6. **Coordinate Reference Systems**\
    The location of an object shall be defined by means of coordinates, which relate to the feature’s position. This profile describes the elements required to define the referencing by means of coordinate systems and datums. A conceptual schema for describing spatial referencing by coordinates and the minimum requirements for multi-dimensional spatial coordinate references are defined.
 7. **Spatial Schemas**\
    S-100 spatial schema requirements are less comprehensive than [ISO 19107:2003 Geographic information - Spatial schema](https://wiki.icaci.org/index.php?title=ISO_19107:2003_Geographic_information_-_Spatial_schema), which contains all the information necessary for describing and manipulating the spatial characteristics of geographic features. This part is only a profile of ISO 19107 and contains thus only a subset of the classes. The profile added additional constraints (omitted optional elements or constrained cardinalities) for hydrographical data.
 8. **Imagery and Gridded data**\
    Imagery and gridded data have become common forms of geographic data and there exist many external standards designed to handle such data. S-100 shall not preclude compatibility with external sources of data. This profile aligns with the ISO/TC 211 standards on imagery and gridded data in order to support multiple sources of data and uses the common information structures. This allows the data to be combined with various other data types. This part defines specific grid organisations to be used for hydrographical data and images associated with hydrographical data. Both simple grids and complex multidimensional grids are defined, as well as point sets and TINs.
 9. **Portrayal**\
    Portrayal is not included in this version of S-100 and will be developed at a later date. ***\*\*\*\* IT IS - THIS WAS ONLY THE CASE IN V1\*\*\*\****
10. **Encoding Formats**\
    S-100 does not mandate particular encoding formats. The developer of a product specification can decide on suitable encoding standards and shall then document their chosen format. Encoding is complicated because numerous encoding standards are available. The parts provide guidelines on the selection and documentation of an encoding format.
11. **Product Specification**\
    A data product specification defines a geographic data product, and describes all the features, attributes and relationships of a given application and their mapping to a dataset. This part describes data product specifications for hydrographical requirements for geographic data products. Its aim is to provide a clear and similar structure for any data product specification to be written.